@c Copyright (C) 1999-2017 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c This is part of the CPP and GCC manuals.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gcc.texi.

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Options affecting include directory search in the preprocessor
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@c If this file is included with the flag ``cppmanual'' set, it is
@c formatted for inclusion in the CPP manual; otherwise the main GCC manual.

@item -I @var{dir}
@itemx -iquote @var{dir}
@itemx -isystem @var{dir}
@itemx -idirafter @var{dir}
@opindex I
@opindex iquote
@opindex isystem
@opindex idirafter
@var{dir}をプリプロセス中のヘッダファイルを検索するためのディレクトリのリストに加える。
@ifset cppmanual
@xref{Search Path}.
@end ifset
@var{dir}が@samp{=}で始まる場合、@samp{=}がsysroot接頭辞によって置き換えられる。
@option{-sysroot}と@option{-isysroot}参照。

@option{-iquote}で指定されたディレクトリは、ディレクティブの引用形式@code{@w{#include "@var{file}"}}にのみ適用される。
@option{-I}、@option{-isystem}、または@option{-idirafter}で指定されたディレクトリは、@code{@w{#include "@var{file}"}}と@code{@w{#include <@var{file}>}}ディレクティブの両方を検索するために適用される。

You can specify any number or combination of these options on the 
command line to search for header files in several directories.  
The lookup order is as follows:

@enumerate
@item
For the quote form of the include directive, the directory of the current
file is searched first.

@item
For the quote form of the include directive, the directories specified
by @option{-iquote} options are searched in left-to-right order,
as they appear on the command line.

@item
Directories specified with @option{-I} options are scanned in
left-to-right order.

@item
Directories specified with @option{-isystem} options are scanned in
left-to-right order.

@item
Standard system directories are scanned.

@item
Directories specified with @option{-idirafter} options are scanned in
left-to-right order.
@end enumerate

You can use @option{-I} to override a system header
file, substituting your own version, since these directories are
searched before the standard system header file directories.  
However, you should
not use this option to add directories that contain vendor-supplied
system header files; use @option{-isystem} for that.

The @option{-isystem} and @option{-idirafter} options also mark the directory
as a system directory, so that it gets the same special treatment that
is applied to the standard system directories.
@ifset cppmanual
@xref{System Headers}.
@end ifset

If a standard system include directory, or a directory specified with
@option{-isystem}, is also specified with @option{-I}, the @option{-I}
option is ignored.  The directory is still searched but as a
system directory at its normal position in the system include chain.
This is to ensure that GCC's procedure to fix buggy system headers and
the ordering for the @code{#include_next} directive are not inadvertently
changed.
If you really need to change the search order for system directories,
use the @option{-nostdinc} and/or @option{-isystem} options.
@ifset cppmanual
@xref{System Headers}.
@end ifset

@item -I-
@opindex I-
検索パスを分割する。
このオプションは廃止予定である。@option{-I-}の前の@option{-I}ディレクトリの代わりに@option{-iquote}を使い、@option{-I-}を削除してください。

@option{-I-}オプションの前の@option{-I}オプションで指定したディレクトリは@code{#include "@var{file}"}の場合にのみ検索される。それらは@code{#include <@var{file}>}では検索されない。

もし追加のディレクトリが@option{-I-}オプションの後に@option{-I}オプションで指定されたなら、それらのディレクトリは
すべての@code{#include}ディレクティブで検索される。（普通の@emph{すべての}@option{-I}ディレクトリはこの方法で検索される。）

それに加えて、the @option{-I-}オプションは現在のディレクトリ（現在の入力ファイルの元）を
@code{#include "@var{file}"}の最初の検索でディレクトリとして使うことを禁じる。
@option{-I}のこの効果を上書きする方法はない。

@ifset cppmanual
@xref{Search Path}.
@end ifset

@item -iprefix @var{prefix}
@opindex iprefix
Specify @var{prefix} as the prefix for subsequent @option{-iwithprefix}
options.  If the prefix represents a directory, you should include the
final @samp{/}.

@item -iwithprefix @var{dir}
@itemx -iwithprefixbefore @var{dir}
@opindex iwithprefix
@opindex iwithprefixbefore
Append @var{dir} to the prefix specified previously with
@option{-iprefix}, and add the resulting directory to the include search
path.  @option{-iwithprefixbefore} puts it in the same place @option{-I}
would; @option{-iwithprefix} puts it where @option{-idirafter} would.

@item -isysroot @var{dir}
@opindex isysroot
This option is like the @option{--sysroot} option, but applies only to
header files (except for Darwin targets, where it applies to both header
files and libraries).  See the @option{--sysroot} option for more
information.

@item -imultilib @var{dir}
@opindex imultilib
Use @var{dir} as a subdirectory of the directory containing
target-specific C++ headers.

@item -nostdinc
@opindex nostdinc
Do not search the standard system directories for header files.
Only the directories explicitly specified with @option{-I},
@option{-iquote}, @option{-isystem}, and/or @option{-idirafter}
options (and the directory of the current file, if appropriate) 
are searched.

@item -nostdinc++
@opindex nostdinc++
Do not search for header files in the C++-specific standard directories,
but do still search the other standard directories.  (This option is
used when building the C++ library.)

