\input texinfo-ja  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename gcc.info
@afourpaper
@documentlanguage jp
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c INTERNALS is used by md.texi to determine whether to include the
@c whole of that file, in the internals manual, or only the part
@c dealing with constraints, in the user manual.
@clear INTERNALS

@c NOTE: checks/things to do:
@c
@c -have bob do a search in all seven files for "mew" (ideally --mew,
@c  but i may have forgotten the occasional "--"..).
@c     Just checked... all have `--'!  Bob 22Jul96
@c     Use this to search:   grep -n '\-\-mew' *.texi
@c -item/itemx, text after all (sub/sub)section titles, etc..
@c -consider putting the lists of options on pp 17--> etc in columns or
@c  some such.
@c -overfulls.  do a search for "mew" in the files, and you will see
@c   overfulls that i noted but could not deal with.
@c -have to add text:  beginning of chapter 8

@c
@c anything else?                       --mew 10feb93

@include gcc-common.texi

@settitle Using the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC)

@c Create a separate index for command line options.
@defcodeindex op
@c Merge the standard indexes into a single one.
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex ky cp
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex tp cp

@paragraphindent 1

@c %**end of header

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 1988-2018 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``Funding Free Software'', the Front-Cover
Texts being (a) (see below), and with the Back-Cover Texts being (b)
(see below).  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.

(a) The FSF's Front-Cover Text is:

     A GNU Manual

(b) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is:

     You have freedom to copy and modify this GNU Manual, like GNU
     software.  Copies published by the Free Software Foundation raise
     funds for GNU development.
@end copying
@ifnottex
@dircategory Software development
@direntry
* gcc: (gcc).                  GNUコンパイラコレクション
* g++: (gcc).                  GNU C++コンパイラ
* gcov: (gcc) Gcov.            @command{gcov}---テスト網羅プログラム
* gcov-tool: (gcc) Gcov-tool.  @command{gcov-tool}---オフラインgcdaプロファイル処理プログラム
* gcov-dump: (gcc) Gcov-dump.  @command{gcov-dump}---オフラインgcdaプロファイルダンプツール
@end direntry
This file documents the use of the GNU compilers.
@sp 1
@insertcopying
@sp 1
@end ifnottex

@setchapternewpage odd
@titlepage
@title Using the GNU Compiler Collection
@versionsubtitle
@author Richard M. Stallman and the @sc{GCC} Developer Community
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Published by:
@multitable @columnfractions 0.5 0.5
@item GNU Press
@tab Website: @uref{http://www.gnupress.org}
@item a division of the
@tab General: @email{press@@gnu.org}
@item Free Software Foundation
@tab Orders:  @email{sales@@gnu.org}
@item 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor
@tab Tel 617-542-5942
@item Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA
@tab Fax 617-542-2652
@end multitable
@sp 2
@ifset FSFPRINT
@c Update this ISBN when printing a new edition.
@acronym{ISBN} 1-882114-39-6

Cover art by Gary M. Torrisi.  Cover design by Jonathan Richard.
@end ifset
@ifclear FSFPRINT
Last printed October 2003 for GCC 3.3.1.@*
Printed copies are available for $45 each.
@end ifclear
@sp 1
@insertcopying
@end titlepage
@summarycontents
@contents
@page

@node Top, G++ and GCC
@top 導入
@cindex introduction

このマニュアルは、GNUコンパイラの使う方法、機能、非互換性、バグを報告する方法を文書化する。
それは、コンパイラGCCバージョン @value{version-GCC}に対応する。それらを新しいターゲットに移植する方法を含む
GNUコンパイラの内部と新しい言語のためもののフロントエンドを書く方法に関するある情報は、
別々のマニュアルで文書化される。  @xref{Top,,Introduction, gccint, GNUコンパイラコレクション(GCC)の内部}.

@menu
* G++ and GCC::     C、C++プログラムをコンパイルできる。
* Standards::       GCCがサポートしている言語標準
* Invoking GCC::    @samp{gcc}がサポートしているコマンドオプション
* C Implementation:: ISO Cの仕様をGCCがどのように実装しているか
* C++ Implementation:: ISO C++の仕様をGCCが同様に実装しているか
* C Extensions::    C言語へのGNUの拡張
* C++ Extensions::  C++言語へのGNUの拡張
* Objective-C::     GNU Objective-Cランタイムの特徴
* Compatibility::   バイナリ互換性
* Gcov::            @command{gcov}---テスト網羅プログラム
* Gcov-tool::       @command{gcov-tool}---オフラインgcdaプロファイル処理プログラム
* Gcov-tool::       @command{gcov-dump}---オフラインgcdaプロファイルダンプツール
* Trouble::         もしGCCを使っていて問題が起こったら
* Bugs::            どのように、なぜ、どこへバグを報告するか
* Service::         GCCで助けを得る方法
* Contributing::    GCCでの試験と開発で貢献する方法

* Funding::         自由なソフトウェアに資金提供を保証するのを助ける方法。
* GNU Project::     GNUプロジェクトとGNU/Linux

* Copying::         GNU General Public LicenseはGCCをどのようにコピーして共有する方法を提供する
* GNU Free Documentation License:: このマニュアルをコピーして共有する方法
* Contributors::    GCCに貢献している人々

* Option Index::    コマンドラインオプションの索引
* Keyword Index::   コンセプトとシンボル名の索引
@end menu

@include frontends.texi
@include standards.texi
@include invoke.texi
@include implement-c.texi
@include implement-cxx.texi
@include extend.texi
@include objc.texi
@include compat.texi
@include gcov.texi
@include gcov-tool.texi
@include gcov-dump.texi
@include trouble.texi
@include bugreport.texi
@include service.texi
@include contribute.texi

@include funding.texi
@include gnu.texi
@include gpl_v3.texi

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c GFDL
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@include fdl.texi

@include contrib.texi

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Indexes
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Option Index
@unnumbered Option Index

GCCのコマンドライン・オプションは、最初の@samp{-}または@samp{-}なしで
ここでインデックスを付けられる。オプションには両方の正と負の形
（例えば@option{-f@var{オプション}}と@option{-fno-@var{オプション}}）がある所で、
マニュアルの関連したエントリは最適な形の下でインデックスを付けられる;
両方の形を調べることは、時々役に立つかもしれない。

@printindex op

@node Keyword Index
@unnumbered Keyword Index

@printindex cp

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Epilogue
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@bye
